Welcome back everyone to this lecture on time shifting often certain models for predicting prices are
going to require us to shift our data forward or backward.
A certain amount of time steps locally Pandurs makes this really easy and we're going to find out how.
It's basically just a simple method call for the shift method.
Let's hop over to Jupiter notebook and we'll be working at the same Wall-Mart data set.
We worked with in the previous lecture OK here I am my Jupiter notebook.
I've imported pandas as well as non-prime that plot lib.
Now we're only really going to be using panderers for this lecture and I've read in my Wal-Mart stock
C S V indicating that the date is the index column and I want to also parse the dates so their date
time objects so this only works if Date Time indices remember that pretty much everything in the section
of the course and onwards is only going to work with a date time index.
But let's take a look at our head of the data frame and notice here that it's basically daily data.
So we have the third the fourth the fifth and then it jumps to six and then it jumps to 9.
Now this jump from 6 to 9.
That's because the weekend Saturday and Sunday aren't included.
That's seven and eight.
So it's Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday.
But essentially they're just time steps of days and we take a look at the tail of our data.
It's a similar thing.
So here we have kind of a weekend or holiday jump depending on what happened here.
And then again it goes back to daily 27 28 29 30 etc..
What I want you to do is notice the actual opening date and its corresponding price so fifty nine point
ninety seven goes with the third sixty point two goes.
The fourth here and for the tail.
I want you to notice that sixty nine point two goes to the twenty ninth and sixty nine point one goes
to the 30th.
So if you ever want to shift your data upwards by 1 timestep that is essentially one index position
up.
All you need to do is grab your data frame say if you scroll down here a little bit and then you can
say shift and this is a method you can call off your data frame.
And if you do a tap here it says period.
So shift the index by the Zari number periods.
So we all end up doing is saying the periods that precision the periods is equal to one period which
is sent to just one index row.
And if we take a look at the head for that.
Notice now that since everything's been shifted up 1 we no longer have any value for the very first.
So that gets filled in with no values.
And if you look at fifty nine point seven.
Now that's sync up with the fourth.
So if we come back up here 59 points nine 7 that will sync up with the third.
Earlier you shifted everything up one period.
So now that nine point seven is linked up with the fourth which also means we check out the tail of
this that we essentially lose the last row of data it gets shifted to a time stamp or a time row that
we don't have.
And it doesn't actually fill it in.
It just essentially gets rid of it.
So keep that in mind you're going to lose that very tail end by a certain number of periods that you
shift forward if you want to shift backwards.
That's very easy.
You just set the periods to negative.
So you can say periods negative 1.
And now if you look at the tail since everything has been shifted backwards the tail is now null.
And if you look at the head we would have lost that very first row of data.
So coming back to the original had noticed it was fifty nine point ninety seven since we shifted everything
backwards one day or one time step.
It's now sixty point two and that very first row has now been lost.
So if you want to shift backwards it's just a negative.
All right the very last thing I want to briefly touch upon we won't really see it use that often but
I do want you to be aware it is using t shift and the frequency argument.
So the shift in the frequency argument essentially what it does is it shifts all the particular rows
to the matching time string code that you provide.
So don't really think of it as shifting everything forward by the time stream code.
Instead think of it as shifting everything on the index to match the same time stream code.
So to actually visualize this or to show you what I mean I'm going to ask for the original data frame
head.
So let's take a look at these first six rows.
Everything belongs to January of 2012.
Now imagine that I want to use some sort of time stream code such as the monthly frequency to shift
every single row that's in the same month to have the matching tie date time index.
So that is all of these roads that are in January to share the last day of the month.
So January 30 first the way I can do that is offer this data frame I can call shift or shift or actually
the same thing.
And then say frequency is month and then we'll say the head of this.
And notice what happens here.
I don't actually lose any data because I'm not really actually shifting my data.
Instead what I'm doing is I'm shifting the index itself to match up with whatever frequency I specifically
provided that time string code that we discussed earlier in this case it's monthly.
So all these January rows end up getting shifted to have an index matching up with the end of the month
that is January 31.
I could do a similar thing for for instance end of year run that and now everything that was in 2012
ends up getting shifted to have the same end of year date time index.
So you can almost think of this as a group by that instead of doing an aggregation you just reassign
the actual date time for that particular row to match up with whatever frequency you provided.
So that's something that's available to you.
We won't really use it that often.
I don't believe we ever throughout the rest of the course but just be aware that it does exist in case
you ever feel the need for it.
Okay.
Really.
All you need to know is how did you shift and then specify the periods of corresponding date time index.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture.